DOCKER.md, before:

# ZAP MCP Server - Docker Setup

This document describes how to run the ZAP MCP Server in a Docker container and how to scan localhost applications.

## ⚠️ IMPORTANT: Automatic Localhost URL Transformation

**✅ AUTOMATIC TRANSFORMATION:** The server now automatically detects Docker environments and transforms `localhost`/`127.0.0.1` URLs to `host.docker.internal`:

```bash
# ✅ These URLs are automatically transformed in Docker:
URL: http://localhost:3000     → http://host.docker.internal:3000
URL: http://127.0.0.1:8080    → http://host.docker.internal:8080
URL: https://localhost:8443    → https://host.docker.internal:8443

# ✅ You can now use localhost URLs directly!
```

**This means you no longer need to manually replace `localhost` with `host.docker.internal` - it happens automatically!**

## Prerequisites

- Docker and Docker Compose installed
- At least 4GB RAM for the container
- Ports 8080 and 8082 available

## Quick Start

### Option 1: Host Gateway (Recommended)

```bash
# Build container
./build.sh

# Start container
./start.sh

# Check status
docker-compose ps
```

**⚠️ CRITICAL: For localhost scans, you can now use:**
- `http://localhost:3000` (automatically transformed to `http://host.docker.internal:3000`)
- `http://127.0.0.1:8080` (automatically transformed to `http://host.docker.internal:8080`)
- **No manual URL replacement needed!**

## Localhost Scanning

### ⚠️ CRITICAL PROBLEM
Docker containers are isolated by default. **`localhost` in the container points to the container itself, not the host!**

**This means:**
- ❌ `http://localhost:3000` will NOT reach your local development server
- ❌ `http://localhost:8080` will NOT reach your local API
- ❌ Any `localhost` URL will fail when scanning from Docker containers

**You MUST use `host.docker.internal` instead of `localhost` for all localhost applications!**

### ✅ AUTOMATIC SOLUTION

**The server automatically handles localhost URL transformation:**

```bash
# ✅ These work automatically in Docker:
http://localhost:3000     → http://host.docker.internal:3000
http://127.0.0.1:8080    → http://host.docker.internal:8080
https://localhost:8443    → https://host.docker.internal:8443

# ✅ You can use localhost URLs directly!
```

**No manual URL replacement needed - the server detects Docker and transforms URLs automatically!**

## Configuration

**📖 For complete configuration details, see [README.md](README.md#-configuration)**

### Docker-Specific Settings

- `ZAP_SESSION_NAME`: Session Name (Default: `zap_docker_session`)
- `ZAP_MCP_HOST`: MCP Server Host (Default: `0.0.0.0`)

### Volumes

- `zap-data`: Persistent ZAP sessions
- `./logs`: Log files

## Access

**📖 For complete access information, see [README.md](README.md#-quick-start)**

After startup, the following services are available:

- **ZAP API**: http://localhost:8080
- **MCP Server**: http://localhost:8082/mcp

## Example Scans

### Automatic URL Transformation
```bash
# Test ZAP API directly
curl http://localhost:8080/JSON/core/view/version/

# Test MCP Server
curl http://localhost:8082/mcp

# ✅ AUTOMATIC: Scan localhost app (URLs are automatically transformed)
# ✅ CORRECT: http://localhost:3000 (automatically becomes http://host.docker.internal:3000)
# ✅ CORRECT: http://127.0.0.1:8080 (automatically becomes http://host.docker.internal:8080)
```

### Example with OWASP Juice Shop
```bash
# Scan OWASP Juice Shop (publicly available test target)
curl -X POST http://localhost:8082/mcp \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "tool": "start_complete_scan",
    "arguments": {
      "url": "https://juice-shop.herokuapp.com/#/",
      "include_findings": true
    }
  }'
```

## Troubleshooting

### Container Won't Start

```bash
# Check logs
docker-compose logs zap-mcp

# Check container status
docker-compose ps
```

### ZAP Won't Start

```bash
# Log into container
docker-compose exec zap-mcp bash

# Check ZAP status
curl http://localhost:8080/JSON/core/view/version/
```

### Localhost Access Doesn't Work

**✅ AUTOMATIC TRANSFORMATION:** The server automatically transforms `localhost` URLs to `host.docker.internal`. If you're still having issues:

```bash
# ✅ CORRECT: Check if host.docker.internal is reachable
docker-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://host.docker.internal:3000

# ✅ ALSO CORRECT: Use localhost (automatically transformed)
docker-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://localhost:3000

# If host.docker.internal doesn't work, try host IP address
docker-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://172.17.0.1:3000
```

**The server automatically handles URL transformation - you can use `localhost` URLs directly!**

### Port Conflicts

If ports are already in use, configure custom ports:

**Using .env file (Recommended):**

```bash
# Copy the example file
cp env.example .env

# Edit .env file
ZAP_PORT=8081
ZAP_MCP_PORT=8083
ZAP_BASE=http://127.0.0.1:8081
```

**Using environment variables:**

```bash
# Set custom ports
export ZAP_PORT=8081
export ZAP_MCP_PORT=8083
export ZAP_BASE="http://127.0.0.1:8081"

# Then start containers
./start.sh
```

**Connect to**: `http://localhost:8083/mcp`

## Performance Tuning

### Memory

For large scans, increase available memory:

```yaml
services:
  zap-mcp:
    deploy:
      resources:
        limits:
          memory: 8G
        reservations:
          memory: 4G
```

### CPU

```yaml
services:
  zap-mcp:
    deploy:
      resources:
        limits:
          cpus: '4.0'
        reservations:
          cpus: '2.0'
```

## Security

- Container runs as non-root user (`zap`)
- ZAP API keys are disabled by default
- Only necessary ports are exposed

## Updates

```bash
# Rebuild image
./build.sh

# Restart container
docker-compose down
docker-compose up -d
```

## Solution Comparison

| Solution | Advantages | Disadvantages | Recommendation |
|----------|------------|---------------|----------------|
| Host Gateway | Secure, isolated, flexible | None (automatic URL transformation) | ✅ **Recommended** |

## Usage with MCP Clients

**📖 For complete MCP client usage instructions, see [README.md](README.md#-connect-your-mcp-client)**

The Docker container provides the MCP server via HTTP at: `http://localhost:8082/mcp`

## Advanced Configuration

**📖 For advanced configuration options, see [README.md](README.md#-configuration)**

### Docker-Specific Advanced Options

- Custom ZAP versions
- Additional ZAP addons
- Persistent session management

Commit message:

Fix: Configure Firefox for headless mode in Docker and Podman setups. Added necessary environment variables and JVM options for AJAX scans. Updated documentation to reflect the inclusion of Firefox ESR and its headless capabilities.

DOCKER.md, after:

# ZAP MCP Server - Docker Setup

This document describes how to run the ZAP MCP Server in a Docker container and how to scan localhost applications.

## ⚠️ IMPORTANT: Automatic Localhost URL Transformation

**✅ AUTOMATIC TRANSFORMATION:** The server now automatically detects Docker environments and transforms `localhost`/`127.0.0.1` URLs to `host.docker.internal`:

```bash
# ✅ These URLs are automatically transformed in Docker:
URL: http://localhost:3000     → http://host.docker.internal:3000
URL: http://127.0.0.1:8080    → http://host.docker.internal:8080
URL: https://localhost:8443    → https://host.docker.internal:8443

# ✅ You can now use localhost URLs directly!
```

**This means you no longer need to manually replace `localhost` with `host.docker.internal` - it happens automatically!**

## Prerequisites

- Docker and Docker Compose installed
- At least 4GB RAM for the container
- Ports 8080 and 8082 available
- Firefox ESR installed in container (for AJAX scans)

## Quick Start

### Option 1: Host Gateway (Recommended)

```bash
# Build container
./build.sh

# Start container
./start.sh

# Check status
docker-compose ps
```

**⚠️ CRITICAL: For localhost scans, you can now use:**
- `http://localhost:3000` (automatically transformed to `http://host.docker.internal:3000`)
- `http://127.0.0.1:8080` (automatically transformed to `http://host.docker.internal:8080`)
- **No manual URL replacement needed!**

## Localhost Scanning

### ⚠️ CRITICAL PROBLEM
Docker containers are isolated by default. **`localhost` in the container points to the container itself, not the host!**

**This means:**
- ❌ `http://localhost:3000` will NOT reach your local development server
- ❌ `http://localhost:8080` will NOT reach your local API
- ❌ Any `localhost` URL will fail when scanning from Docker containers

**You MUST use `host.docker.internal` instead of `localhost` for all localhost applications!**

### ✅ AUTOMATIC SOLUTION

**The server automatically handles localhost URL transformation:**

```bash
# ✅ These work automatically in Docker:
http://localhost:3000     → http://host.docker.internal:3000
http://127.0.0.1:8080    → http://host.docker.internal:8080
https://localhost:8443    → https://host.docker.internal:8443

# ✅ You can use localhost URLs directly!
```

**No manual URL replacement needed - the server detects Docker and transforms URLs automatically!**

## Configuration

**📖 For complete configuration details, see [README.md](README.md#-configuration)**

### Docker-Specific Settings

- `ZAP_SESSION_NAME`: Session Name (Default: `zap_docker_session`)
- `ZAP_MCP_HOST`: MCP Server Host (Default: `0.0.0.0`)

### Volumes

- `zap-data`: Persistent ZAP sessions
- `./logs`: Log files

## Access

**📖 For complete access information, see [README.md](README.md#-quick-start)**

After startup, the following services are available:

- **ZAP API**: http://localhost:8080
- **MCP Server**: http://localhost:8082/mcp

## AJAX Scans

The container includes Firefox ESR for AJAX spider scans:

- **Browser**: Firefox ESR (headless mode)
- **No X11 Required**: Runs completely headless without display server
- **Environment**: `MOZ_HEADLESS=1` with all sandbox features disabled
- **JVM Options**: Headless mode with OpenGL disabled
- **Default Configuration**: Uses `firefox-headless` browser ID

AJAX scans will automatically use the Firefox browser in headless mode without requiring any display server.

## Example Scans

### Automatic URL Transformation
```bash
# Test ZAP API directly
curl http://localhost:8080/JSON/core/view/version/

# Test MCP Server
curl http://localhost:8082/mcp

# ✅ AUTOMATIC: Scan localhost app (URLs are automatically transformed)
# ✅ CORRECT: http://localhost:3000 (automatically becomes http://host.docker.internal:3000)
# ✅ CORRECT: http://127.0.0.1:8080 (automatically becomes http://host.docker.internal:8080)
```

### Example with OWASP Juice Shop
```bash
# Scan OWASP Juice Shop (publicly available test target)
curl -X POST http://localhost:8082/mcp \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "tool": "start_complete_scan",
    "arguments": {
      "url": "https://juice-shop.herokuapp.com/#/",
      "include_findings": true
    }
  }'
```

## Troubleshooting

### Container Won't Start

```bash
# Check logs
docker-compose logs zap-mcp

# Check container status
docker-compose ps
```

### ZAP Won't Start

```bash
# Log into container
docker-compose exec zap-mcp bash

# Check ZAP status
curl http://localhost:8080/JSON/core/view/version/
```

### Localhost Access Doesn't Work

**✅ AUTOMATIC TRANSFORMATION:** The server automatically transforms `localhost` URLs to `host.docker.internal`. If you're still having issues:

```bash
# ✅ CORRECT: Check if host.docker.internal is reachable
docker-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://host.docker.internal:3000

# ✅ ALSO CORRECT: Use localhost (automatically transformed)
docker-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://localhost:3000

# If host.docker.internal doesn't work, try host IP address
docker-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://172.17.0.1:3000
```

**The server automatically handles URL transformation - you can use `localhost` URLs directly!**

### Port Conflicts

If ports are already in use, configure custom ports:

**Using .env file (Recommended):**

```bash
# Copy the example file
cp env.example .env

# Edit .env file
ZAP_PORT=8081
ZAP_MCP_PORT=8083
ZAP_BASE=http://127.0.0.1:8081
```

**Using environment variables:**

```bash
# Set custom ports
export ZAP_PORT=8081
export ZAP_MCP_PORT=8083
export ZAP_BASE="http://127.0.0.1:8081"

# Then start containers
./start.sh
```

**Connect to**: `http://localhost:8083/mcp`

## Performance Tuning

### Memory

For large scans, increase available memory:

```yaml
services:
  zap-mcp:
    deploy:
      resources:
        limits:
          memory: 8G
        reservations:
          memory: 4G
```

### CPU

```yaml
services:
  zap-mcp:
    deploy:
      resources:
        limits:
          cpus: '4.0'
        reservations:
          cpus: '2.0'
```

## Security

- Container runs as non-root user (`zap`)
- ZAP API keys are disabled by default
- Only necessary ports are exposed

## Updates

```bash
# Rebuild image
./build.sh

# Restart container
docker-compose down
docker-compose up -d
```

## Solution Comparison

| Solution | Advantages | Disadvantages | Recommendation |
|----------|------------|---------------|----------------|
| Host Gateway | Secure, isolated, flexible | None (automatic URL transformation) | ✅ **Recommended** |

## Usage with MCP Clients

**📖 For complete MCP client usage instructions, see [README.md](README.md#-connect-your-mcp-client)**

The Docker container provides the MCP server via HTTP at: `http://localhost:8082/mcp`

## Advanced Configuration

**📖 For advanced configuration options, see [README.md](README.md#-configuration)**

### Docker-Specific Advanced Options

- Custom ZAP versions
- Additional ZAP addons
- Persistent session management
