PODMAN.md, before:

# ZAP MCP Server - Podman Setup

This document describes how to run the ZAP MCP Server using Podman and Podman Compose, with specific considerations for Podman's unique features.

## ⚠️ IMPORTANT: Automatic Localhost URL Transformation

**✅ AUTOMATIC TRANSFORMATION:** The server now automatically detects Podman environments and transforms `localhost`/`127.0.0.1` URLs to `host.containers.internal`:

```bash
# ✅ These URLs are automatically transformed in Podman:
URL: http://localhost:3000     → http://host.containers.internal:3000
URL: http://127.0.0.1:8080    → http://host.containers.internal:8080
URL: https://localhost:8443    → https://host.containers.internal:8443

# ✅ You can now use localhost URLs directly!
```

**This means you no longer need to manually replace `localhost` with `host.containers.internal` - it happens automatically!**

## Prerequisites

- Podman and Podman Compose installed
- At least 4GB RAM for the container
- Ports 8080 and 8082 available

### Installing Podman Compose

```bash
# Install podman-compose
pip install podman-compose

# Or using your system package manager
# Ubuntu/Debian:
sudo apt install podman-compose

# Fedora/RHEL:
sudo dnf install podman-compose
```

## Quick Start

### Option 1: Host Gateway (Recommended)

```bash
# Build container
./build.sh

# Start container (auto-detects Podman)
./start.sh

# Check status
podman-compose ps
```

**⚠️ CRITICAL: For localhost scans, you can now use:**
- `http://localhost:3000` (automatically transformed to `http://host.containers.internal:3000`)
- `http://127.0.0.1:8080` (automatically transformed to `http://host.containers.internal:8080`)
- **No manual URL replacement needed!**

## Podman-Specific Configuration

### Using podman-compose.yml

The project includes a dedicated `podman-compose.yml` file optimized for Podman:

```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  zap-mcp:
    build: .
    container_name: zap-custom-mcp
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"  # ZAP API
      - "8082:8082"  # MCP HTTP
    environment:
      # ZAP Configuration
      ZAP_BASE: http://127.0.0.1:8080
      ZAP_AUTOSTART: "true"
      ZAP_SESSION_NAME: zap_podman_session
      ZAP_SESSION_STRATEGY: unique
      ZAP_LOG_LEVEL: INFO
      ZAP_STARTUP_TIMEOUT: "120"
      ZAP_LONG_SCAN_TIMEOUT: "14400"

      # MCP Configuration
      ZAP_MCP_HOST: 0.0.0.0
      ZAP_MCP_PORT: "8082"
      ZAP_MCP_PATH: /mcp

    # Host accessible from container (Linux + Windows)
    extra_hosts:
      - "host.containers.internal:host-gateway"

    volumes:
      - zap-data:/opt/zap/session
      - ./logs:/app/logs

    restart: unless-stopped
```

### Podman vs Docker Differences

| Feature | Docker | Podman |
|---------|--------|--------|
| Host Gateway | `host.docker.internal` | `host.containers.internal` |
| Rootless | Optional | Default |
| Daemon | Required | Not required |
| Security | Less secure by default | More secure by default |
| Compose | `docker-compose` | `podman-compose` |

## Localhost Scanning with Podman

### ⚠️ CRITICAL PROBLEM
Podman containers are isolated by default. **`localhost` in the container points to the container itself, not the host!**

**This means:**
- ❌ `http://localhost:3000` will NOT reach your local development server
- ❌ `http://localhost:8080` will NOT reach your local API
- ❌ Any `localhost` URL will fail when scanning from Podman containers

**You MUST use `host.containers.internal` instead of `localhost` for all localhost applications!**

### ✅ AUTOMATIC SOLUTION

**The server automatically handles localhost URL transformation:**

```bash
# ✅ These work automatically in Podman:
http://localhost:3000     → http://host.containers.internal:3000
http://127.0.0.1:8080    → http://host.containers.internal:8080
https://localhost:8443    → https://host.containers.internal:8443

# ✅ You can use localhost URLs directly!
```

**No manual URL replacement needed - the server detects Podman and transforms URLs automatically!**

## Podman-Specific Commands

### Basic Operations

```bash
# Start containers
podman-compose up -d

# Follow logs
podman-compose logs -f

# Stop containers
podman-compose down

# Rebuild containers
podman-compose build

# Check status
podman-compose ps
```

### Rootless Podman Considerations

**Podman runs rootless by default, which is more secure:**

```bash
# Check if running rootless
podman info | grep "rootless"

# If you need root privileges (not recommended)
sudo podman-compose up -d
```

### Podman Socket Access

```bash
# Enable Podman socket for Docker-compatible tools
systemctl --user enable podman.socket

# Check socket status
systemctl --user status podman.socket
```

## Configuration

**📖 For complete configuration details, see [README.md](README.md#-configuration)**

### Podman-Specific Settings

- `ZAP_SESSION_NAME`: Session Name (Default: `zap_podman_session`)
- `ZAP_MCP_HOST`: MCP Server Host (Default: `0.0.0.0`)

### Volumes

- `zap-data`: Persistent ZAP sessions
- `./logs`: Log files

## Access

**📖 For complete access information, see [README.md](README.md#-quick-start)**

After startup, the following services are available:

- **ZAP API**: http://localhost:8080
- **MCP Server**: http://localhost:8082/mcp

## Example Scans

### Automatic URL Transformation
```bash
# Test ZAP API directly
curl http://localhost:8080/JSON/core/view/version/

# Test MCP Server
curl http://localhost:8082/mcp

# ✅ AUTOMATIC: Scan localhost app (URLs are automatically transformed)
# ✅ CORRECT: http://localhost:3000 (automatically becomes http://host.containers.internal:3000)
# ✅ CORRECT: http://127.0.0.1:8080 (automatically becomes http://host.containers.internal:8080)
```

### Example with OWASP Juice Shop
```bash
# Scan OWASP Juice Shop (publicly available test target)
curl -X POST http://localhost:8082/mcp \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "tool": "start_complete_scan",
    "arguments": {
      "url": "https://juice-shop.herokuapp.com/#/",
      "include_findings": true
    }
  }'
```

## Troubleshooting

### Container Won't Start

```bash
# Check logs
podman-compose logs zap-mcp

# Check container status
podman-compose ps

# Check Podman service
podman system info
```

### ZAP Won't Start

```bash
# Log into container
podman-compose exec zap-mcp bash

# Check ZAP status
curl http://localhost:8080/JSON/core/view/version/
```

### Localhost Access Doesn't Work

**✅ AUTOMATIC TRANSFORMATION:** The server automatically transforms `localhost` URLs to `host.containers.internal`. If you're still having issues:

```bash
# ✅ CORRECT: Check if host.containers.internal is reachable
podman-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://host.containers.internal:3000

# ✅ ALSO CORRECT: Use localhost (automatically transformed)
podman-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://localhost:3000

# If host.containers.internal doesn't work, try host IP address
podman-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://172.17.0.1:3000
```

**The server automatically handles URL transformation - you can use `localhost` URLs directly!**

### Podman-Specific Issues

#### Rootless Permission Issues

```bash
# Check if running rootless
podman info | grep "rootless"

# If permission issues, check user namespaces
podman unshare --rootless-netns ip addr
```

#### Socket Connection Issues

```bash
# Check Podman socket
podman system info

# Restart Podman service
systemctl --user restart podman.socket
```

#### Port Conflicts

If ports are already in use, configure custom ports:

**Using .env file (Recommended):**

```bash
# Copy the example file
cp env.example .env

# Edit .env file
ZAP_PORT=8081
ZAP_MCP_PORT=8083
ZAP_BASE=http://127.0.0.1:8081
```

**Using environment variables:**

```bash
# Set custom ports
export ZAP_PORT=8081
export ZAP_MCP_PORT=8083
export ZAP_BASE="http://127.0.0.1:8081"

# Then start containers
./start.sh
```

**Connect to**: `http://localhost:8083/mcp`

## Performance Tuning

### Memory

For large scans, increase available memory:

```yaml
services:
  zap-mcp:
    deploy:
      resources:
        limits:
          memory: 8G
        reservations:
          memory: 4G
```

### CPU

```yaml
services:
  zap-mcp:
    deploy:
      resources:
        limits:
          cpus: '4.0'
        reservations:
          cpus: '2.0'
```

## Security Advantages of Podman

- **Rootless by default**: More secure than Docker
- **No daemon required**: Reduced attack surface
- **User namespaces**: Better isolation
- **No privileged containers**: Enhanced security

## Updates

```bash
# Rebuild image
./build.sh

# Restart container
podman-compose down
podman-compose up -d
```

## Solution Comparison

| Solution | Advantages | Disadvantages | Recommendation |
|----------|------------|---------------|----------------|
| Host Gateway | Secure, isolated, flexible | None (automatic URL transformation) | ✅ **Recommended** |

## Usage with MCP Clients

**📖 For complete MCP client usage instructions, see [README.md](README.md#-connect-your-mcp-client)**

The Podman container provides the MCP server via HTTP at: `http://localhost:8082/mcp`

## Advanced Configuration

**📖 For advanced configuration options, see [README.md](README.md#-configuration)**

### Podman-Specific Advanced Options

- Custom ZAP versions
- Additional ZAP addons
- Persistent session management
- Rootless Podman considerations

## Migration from Docker

If you're migrating from Docker to Podman:

1. **Install Podman Compose**: `pip install podman-compose`
2. **Update commands**: `docker-compose` → `podman-compose`
3. **Check permissions**: Ensure rootless Podman has necessary permissions
4. **URL transformation is automatic**: No manual changes needed for `localhost` URLs

## Best Practices

1. **Use rootless Podman** for better security
2. **Use `localhost` URLs directly** - automatic transformation handles the rest
3. **Monitor resource usage** with `podman stats`
4. **Clean up regularly** with `podman system prune`
5. **Use Podman Compose** for multi-container applications

## Support

- 📖 [Podman Documentation](https://docs.podman.io/)
- 🐛 [Podman Issues](https://github.com/containers/podman/issues)
- 💬 [Podman Community](https://podman.io/community/)

---

**Podman: The secure, daemonless container engine for Linux!**

Commit message:

Fix: Configure Firefox for headless mode in Docker and Podman setups. Added necessary environment variables and JVM options for AJAX scans. Updated documentation to reflect the inclusion of Firefox ESR and its headless capabilities.

PODMAN.md, after:

# ZAP MCP Server - Podman Setup

This document describes how to run the ZAP MCP Server using Podman and Podman Compose, with specific considerations for Podman's unique features.

## ⚠️ IMPORTANT: Automatic Localhost URL Transformation

**✅ AUTOMATIC TRANSFORMATION:** The server now automatically detects Podman environments and transforms `localhost`/`127.0.0.1` URLs to `host.containers.internal`:

```bash
# ✅ These URLs are automatically transformed in Podman:
URL: http://localhost:3000     → http://host.containers.internal:3000
URL: http://127.0.0.1:8080    → http://host.containers.internal:8080
URL: https://localhost:8443    → https://host.containers.internal:8443

# ✅ You can now use localhost URLs directly!
```

**This means you no longer need to manually replace `localhost` with `host.containers.internal` - it happens automatically!**

## Prerequisites

- Podman and Podman Compose installed
- At least 4GB RAM for the container
- Ports 8080 and 8082 available
- Firefox ESR installed in container (for AJAX scans)

### Installing Podman Compose

```bash
# Install podman-compose
pip install podman-compose

# Or using your system package manager
# Ubuntu/Debian:
sudo apt install podman-compose

# Fedora/RHEL:
sudo dnf install podman-compose
```

## Quick Start

### Option 1: Host Gateway (Recommended)

```bash
# Build container
./build.sh

# Start container (auto-detects Podman)
./start.sh

# Check status
podman-compose ps
```

**⚠️ CRITICAL: For localhost scans, you can now use:**
- `http://localhost:3000` (automatically transformed to `http://host.containers.internal:3000`)
- `http://127.0.0.1:8080` (automatically transformed to `http://host.containers.internal:8080`)
- **No manual URL replacement needed!**

## Podman-Specific Configuration

### Using podman-compose.yml

The project includes a dedicated `podman-compose.yml` file optimized for Podman:

```yaml
version: '3.8'

services:
  zap-mcp:
    build: .
    container_name: zap-custom-mcp
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"  # ZAP API
      - "8082:8082"  # MCP HTTP
    environment:
      # ZAP Configuration
      ZAP_BASE: http://127.0.0.1:8080
      ZAP_AUTOSTART: "true"
      ZAP_SESSION_NAME: zap_podman_session
      ZAP_SESSION_STRATEGY: unique
      ZAP_LOG_LEVEL: INFO
      ZAP_STARTUP_TIMEOUT: "120"
      ZAP_LONG_SCAN_TIMEOUT: "14400"

      # MCP Configuration
      ZAP_MCP_HOST: 0.0.0.0
      ZAP_MCP_PORT: "8082"
      ZAP_MCP_PATH: /mcp

    # Host accessible from container (Linux + Windows)
    extra_hosts:
      - "host.containers.internal:host-gateway"

    volumes:
      - zap-data:/opt/zap/session
      - ./logs:/app/logs

    restart: unless-stopped
```

### Podman vs Docker Differences

| Feature | Docker | Podman |
|---------|--------|--------|
| Host Gateway | `host.docker.internal` | `host.containers.internal` |
| Rootless | Optional | Default |
| Daemon | Required | Not required |
| Security | Less secure by default | More secure by default |
| Compose | `docker-compose` | `podman-compose` |

## Localhost Scanning with Podman

### ⚠️ CRITICAL PROBLEM
Podman containers are isolated by default. **`localhost` in the container points to the container itself, not the host!**

**This means:**
- ❌ `http://localhost:3000` will NOT reach your local development server
- ❌ `http://localhost:8080` will NOT reach your local API
- ❌ Any `localhost` URL will fail when scanning from Podman containers

**You MUST use `host.containers.internal` instead of `localhost` for all localhost applications!**

### ✅ AUTOMATIC SOLUTION

**The server automatically handles localhost URL transformation:**

```bash
# ✅ These work automatically in Podman:
http://localhost:3000     → http://host.containers.internal:3000
http://127.0.0.1:8080    → http://host.containers.internal:8080
https://localhost:8443    → https://host.containers.internal:8443

# ✅ You can use localhost URLs directly!
```

**No manual URL replacement needed - the server detects Podman and transforms URLs automatically!**

## Podman-Specific Commands

### Basic Operations

```bash
# Start containers
podman-compose up -d

# Follow logs
podman-compose logs -f

# Stop containers
podman-compose down

# Rebuild containers
podman-compose build

# Check status
podman-compose ps
```

### Rootless Podman Considerations

**Podman runs rootless by default, which is more secure:**

```bash
# Check if running rootless
podman info | grep "rootless"

# If you need root privileges (not recommended)
sudo podman-compose up -d
```

### Podman Socket Access

```bash
# Enable Podman socket for Docker-compatible tools
systemctl --user enable podman.socket

# Check socket status
systemctl --user status podman.socket
```

## Configuration

**📖 For complete configuration details, see [README.md](README.md#-configuration)**

### Podman-Specific Settings

- `ZAP_SESSION_NAME`: Session Name (Default: `zap_podman_session`)
- `ZAP_MCP_HOST`: MCP Server Host (Default: `0.0.0.0`)

### Volumes

- `zap-data`: Persistent ZAP sessions
- `./logs`: Log files

## Access

**📖 For complete access information, see [README.md](README.md#-quick-start)**

After startup, the following services are available:

- **ZAP API**: http://localhost:8080
- **MCP Server**: http://localhost:8082/mcp

## AJAX Scans

The container includes Firefox ESR for AJAX spider scans:

- **Browser**: Firefox ESR (headless mode)
- **No X11 Required**: Runs completely headless without display server
- **Environment**: `MOZ_HEADLESS=1` with all sandbox features disabled
- **JVM Options**: Headless mode with OpenGL disabled
- **Default Configuration**: Uses `firefox-headless` browser ID

AJAX scans will automatically use the Firefox browser in headless mode without requiring any display server.

## Example Scans

### Automatic URL Transformation
```bash
# Test ZAP API directly
curl http://localhost:8080/JSON/core/view/version/

# Test MCP Server
curl http://localhost:8082/mcp

# ✅ AUTOMATIC: Scan localhost app (URLs are automatically transformed)
# ✅ CORRECT: http://localhost:3000 (automatically becomes http://host.containers.internal:3000)
# ✅ CORRECT: http://127.0.0.1:8080 (automatically becomes http://host.containers.internal:8080)
```

### Example with OWASP Juice Shop
```bash
# Scan OWASP Juice Shop (publicly available test target)
curl -X POST http://localhost:8082/mcp \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "tool": "start_complete_scan",
    "arguments": {
      "url": "https://juice-shop.herokuapp.com/#/",
      "include_findings": true
    }
  }'
```

## Troubleshooting

### Container Won't Start

```bash
# Check logs
podman-compose logs zap-mcp

# Check container status
podman-compose ps

# Check Podman service
podman system info
```

### ZAP Won't Start

```bash
# Log into container
podman-compose exec zap-mcp bash

# Check ZAP status
curl http://localhost:8080/JSON/core/view/version/
```

### Localhost Access Doesn't Work

**✅ AUTOMATIC TRANSFORMATION:** The server automatically transforms `localhost` URLs to `host.containers.internal`. If you're still having issues:

```bash
# ✅ CORRECT: Check if host.containers.internal is reachable
podman-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://host.containers.internal:3000

# ✅ ALSO CORRECT: Use localhost (automatically transformed)
podman-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://localhost:3000

# If host.containers.internal doesn't work, try host IP address
podman-compose exec zap-mcp curl http://172.17.0.1:3000
```

**The server automatically handles URL transformation - you can use `localhost` URLs directly!**

### Podman-Specific Issues

#### Rootless Permission Issues

```bash
# Check if running rootless
podman info | grep "rootless"

# If permission issues, check user namespaces
podman unshare --rootless-netns ip addr
```

#### Socket Connection Issues

```bash
# Check Podman socket
podman system info

# Restart Podman service
systemctl --user restart podman.socket
```

#### Port Conflicts

If ports are already in use, configure custom ports:

**Using .env file (Recommended):**

```bash
# Copy the example file
cp env.example .env

# Edit .env file
ZAP_PORT=8081
ZAP_MCP_PORT=8083
ZAP_BASE=http://127.0.0.1:8081
```

**Using environment variables:**

```bash
# Set custom ports
export ZAP_PORT=8081
export ZAP_MCP_PORT=8083
export ZAP_BASE="http://127.0.0.1:8081"

# Then start containers
./start.sh
```

**Connect to**: `http://localhost:8083/mcp`

## Performance Tuning

### Memory

For large scans, increase available memory:

```yaml
services:
  zap-mcp:
    deploy:
      resources:
        limits:
          memory: 8G
        reservations:
          memory: 4G
```

### CPU

```yaml
services:
  zap-mcp:
    deploy:
      resources:
        limits:
          cpus: '4.0'
        reservations:
          cpus: '2.0'
```

## Security Advantages of Podman

- **Rootless by default**: More secure than Docker
- **No daemon required**: Reduced attack surface
- **User namespaces**: Better isolation
- **No privileged containers**: Enhanced security

## Updates

```bash
# Rebuild image
./build.sh

# Restart container
podman-compose down
podman-compose up -d
```

## Solution Comparison

| Solution | Advantages | Disadvantages | Recommendation |
|----------|------------|---------------|----------------|
| Host Gateway | Secure, isolated, flexible | None (automatic URL transformation) | ✅ **Recommended** |

## Usage with MCP Clients

**📖 For complete MCP client usage instructions, see [README.md](README.md#-connect-your-mcp-client)**

The Podman container provides the MCP server via HTTP at: `http://localhost:8082/mcp`

## Advanced Configuration

**📖 For advanced configuration options, see [README.md](README.md#-configuration)**

### Podman-Specific Advanced Options

- Custom ZAP versions
- Additional ZAP addons
- Persistent session management
- Rootless Podman considerations

## Migration from Docker

If you're migrating from Docker to Podman:

1. **Install Podman Compose**: `pip install podman-compose`
2. **Update commands**: `docker-compose` → `podman-compose`
3. **Check permissions**: Ensure rootless Podman has necessary permissions
4. **URL transformation is automatic**: No manual changes needed for `localhost` URLs

## Best Practices

1. **Use rootless Podman** for better security
2. **Use `localhost` URLs directly** - automatic transformation handles the rest
3. **Monitor resource usage** with `podman stats`
4. **Clean up regularly** with `podman system prune`
5. **Use Podman Compose** for multi-container applications

## Support

- 📖 [Podman Documentation](https://docs.podman.io/)
- 🐛 [Podman Issues](https://github.com/containers/podman/issues)
- 💬 [Podman Community](https://podman.io/community/)

---

**Podman: The secure, daemonless container engine for Linux!**
